<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Hammerpond Park Burglary</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="the-hammerpond-park-burglary" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Hammerpond Park Burglary</h2>
			<p>It is a moot point whether burglary is to be considered as a sport, a trade, or an art. For a trade, the technique is scarcely rigid enough, and its claims to be considered an art are vitiated by the mercenary element that qualifies its triumphs. On the whole it seems to be most justly ranked as sport, a sport for which no rules are at present formulated, and of which the prizes are distributed in an extremely informal manner. It was this informality of burglary that led to the regrettable extinction of two promising beginners at Hammerpond Park.</p>
			<p>The stakes offered in this affair consisted chiefly of diamonds and other personal bric-a-brac belonging to the newly married Lady Aveling. Lady Aveling, as the reader will remember, was the only daughter of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Montague Pangs, the well-known hostess. Her marriage to Lord Aveling was extensively advertised in the papers, the quantity and quality of her wedding presents, and the fact that the honeymoon was to be spent at <span epub:type="z3998:place">Hammerpond</span>. The announcement of these valuable prizes created a considerable sensation in the small circle in which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Teddy Watkins was the undisputed leader, and it was decided that, accompanied by a duly qualified assistant, he should visit the village of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Hammerpond</span> in his professional capacity.</p>
			<p>Being a man of naturally retiring and modest disposition, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins determined to make this visit <abbr><i xml:lang="la">incog</i>.</abbr>, and after due consideration of the conditions of his enterprise, he selected the role of a landscape artist and the unassuming surname of Smith. He preceded his assistant, who, it was decided, should join him only on the last afternoon of his stay at <span epub:type="z3998:place">Hammerpond</span>. Now the village of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Hammerpond</span> is perhaps one of the prettiest little corners in <span epub:type="z3998:place">Sussex</span>; many thatched houses still survive, the flint-built church with its tall spire nestling under the down is one of the finest and least restored in the county, and the beech-woods and bracken jungles through which the road runs to the great house are singularly rich in what the vulgar artist and photographer call “bits.” So that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins, on his arrival with two virgin canvases, a brand-new easel, a paintbox, portmanteau, an ingenious little ladder made in sections (after the pattern of the late lamented master Charles Peace), crowbar, and wire coils, found himself welcomed with effusion and some curiosity by half-a-dozen other brethren of the brush. It rendered the disguise he had chosen unexpectedly plausible, but it inflicted upon him a considerable amount of aesthetic conversation for which he was very imperfectly prepared.</p>
			<p>“Have you exhibited very much?” said Young Porson in the bar-parlour of the “Coach and Horses,” where <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins was skilfully accumulating local information on the night of his arrival.</p>
			<p>“Very little,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins, “just a snack here and there.”</p>
			<p>“Academy?”</p>
			<p>“In course. <em>And</em> the Crystal Palace.”</p>
			<p>“Did they hang you well?” said Porson.</p>
			<p>“Don’t rot,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins; “I don’t like it.”</p>
			<p>“I mean did they put you in a good place?”</p>
			<p>“Whadyer mean?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins suspiciously. “One ’ud think you were trying to make out I’d been put away.”</p>
			<p>Porson had been brought up by aunts, and was a gentlemanly young man even for an artist; he did not know what being “put away” meant, but he thought it best to explain that he intended nothing of the sort. As the question of hanging seemed a sore point with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins, he tried to divert the conversation a little.</p>
			<p>“Do you do figure-work at all?”</p>
			<p>“No, never had a head for figures,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins, “my miss⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Smith, I mean, does all that.”</p>
			<p>“She paints too!” said Porson. “That’s rather jolly.”</p>
			<p>“Very,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins, though he really did not think so, and, feeling the conversation was drifting a little beyond his grasp, added, “I came down here to paint Hammerpond House by moonlight.”</p>
			<p>“Really!” said Porson. “That’s rather a novel idea.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins, “I thought it rather a good notion when it occurred to me. I expect to begin tomorrow night.”</p>
			<p>“What! You don’t mean to paint in the open, by night?”</p>
			<p>“I do, though.”</p>
			<p>“But how will you see your canvas?”</p>
			<p>“Have a bloomin’ cop’s⁠—” began <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins, rising too quickly to the question, and then realising this, bawled to Miss Durgan for another glass of beer. “I’m goin’ to have a thing called a dark lantern,” he said to Porson.</p>
			<p>“But it’s about new moon now,” objected Porson. “There won’t be any moon.”</p>
			<p>“There’ll be the house,” said Watkins, “at any rate. I’m goin’, you see, to paint the house first and the moon afterwards.”</p>
			<p>“Oh!” said Porson, too staggered to continue the conversation.</p>
			<p>“They doo say,” said old Durgan, the landlord, who had maintained a respectful silence during the technical conversation, “as there’s no less than three p’licemen from ’Azelworth on dewty every night in the house⁠—‘count of this Lady Aveling ’n her jewellery. One’m won fower-and-six last night, off second footman⁠—tossin’.”</p>
			<p>Towards sunset next day <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins, virgin canvas, easel, and a very considerable case of other appliances in hand, strolled up the pleasant pathway through the beech-woods to Hammerpond Park, and pitched his apparatus in a strategic position commanding the house. Here he was observed by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Raphael Sant, who was returning across the park from a study of the chalk-pits. His curiosity having been fired by Porson’s account of the new arrival, he turned aside with the idea of discussing nocturnal art.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins was apparently unaware of his approach. A friendly conversation with Lady Hammerpond’s butler had just terminated, and that individual, surrounded by the three pet dogs which it was his duty to take for an airing after dinner had been served, was receding in the distance. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins was mixing colour with an air of great industry. Sant, approaching more nearly, was surprised to see the colour in question was as harsh and brilliant an emerald green as it is possible to imagine. Having cultivated an extreme sensibility to colour from his earliest years, he drew the air in sharply between his teeth at the very first glimpse of this brew. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins turned round. He looked annoyed.</p>
			<p>“What on earth are you going to do with that <em>beastly</em> green?” said Sant.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins realised that his zeal to appear busy in the eyes of the butler had evidently betrayed him into some technical error. He looked at Sant and hesitated.</p>
			<p>“Pardon my rudeness,” said Sant; “but really, that green is altogether too amazing. It came as a shock. What <em>do</em> you mean to do with it?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins was collecting his resources. Nothing could save the situation but decision. “If you come here interrupting my work,” he said, “I’m a-goin’ to paint your face with it.”</p>
			<p>Sant retired, for he was a humourist and a peaceful man. Going down the hill he met Porson and Wainwright. “Either that man is a genius or he is a dangerous lunatic,” said he. “Just go up and look at his green.” And he continued his way, his countenance brightened by a pleasant anticipation of a cheerful affray round an easel in the gloaming, and the shedding of much green paint.</p>
			<p>But to Porson and Wainwright <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins was less aggressive, and explained that the green was intended to be the first coating of his picture. It was, he admitted in response to a remark, an absolutely new method, invented by himself. But subsequently he became more reticent; he explained he was not going to tell every passerby the secret of his own particular style, and added some scathing remarks upon the meanness of people “hanging about” to pick up such tricks of the masters as they could, which immediately relieved him of their company.</p>
			<p>Twilight deepened, first one then another star appeared. The rooks amid the tall trees to the left of the house had long since lapsed into slumbrous silence, the house itself lost all the details of its architecture and became a dark grey outline, and then the windows of the salon shone out brilliantly, the conservatory was lighted up, and here and there a bedroom window burnt yellow. Had anyone approached the easel in the park it would have been found deserted. One brief uncivil word in brilliant green sullied the purity of its canvas. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins was busy in the shrubbery with his assistant, who had discreetly joined him from the carriage-drive.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins was inclined to be self-congratulatory upon the ingenious device by which he had carried all his apparatus boldly, and in the sight of all men, right up to the scene of operations. “That’s the dressing-room,” he said to his assistant, “and, as soon as the maid takes the candle away and goes down to supper, we’ll call in. My! how nice the house do look, to be sure, against the starlight, and with all its windows and lights! Swapme, Jim, I almost wish I <em>was</em> a painter-chap. Have you fixed that there wire across the path from the laundry?”</p>
			<p>He cautiously approached the house until he stood below the dressing-room window, and began to put together his folding ladder. He was much too experienced a practitioner to feel any unusual excitement. Jim was reconnoitring the smoking-room. Suddenly, close beside <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins in the bushes, there was a violent crash and a stifled curse. Someone had tumbled over the wire which his assistant had just arranged. He heard feet running on the gravel pathway beyond. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins, like all true artists, was a singularly shy man, and he incontinently dropped his folding ladder and began running circumspectly through the shrubbery. He was indistinctly aware of two people hot upon his heels, and he fancied that he distinguished the outline of his assistant in front of him. In another moment he had vaulted the low stone wall bounding the shrubbery, and was in the open park. Two thuds on the turf followed his own leap.</p>
			<p>It was a close chase in the darkness through the trees. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins was a loosely-built man and in good training, and he gained handover-hand upon the hoarsely panting figure in front. Neither spoke, but, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins pulled up alongside, a qualm of awful doubt came over him. The other man turned his head at the same moment and gave an exclamation of surprise. “It’s not Jim,” thought <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins, and simultaneously the stranger flung himself, as it were, at Watkin’s knees, and they were forthwith grappling on the ground together. “Lend a hand, Bill,” cried the stranger as the third man came up. And Bill did⁠—two hands in fact, and some accentuated feet. The fourth man, presumably Jim, had apparently turned aside and made off in a different direction. At any rate, he did not join the trio.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins’ memory of the incidents of the next two minutes is extremely vague. He has a dim recollection of having his thumb in the corner of the mouth of the first man, and feeling anxious about its safety, and for some seconds at least he held the head of the gentleman answering to the name of Bill, to the ground by the hair. He was also kicked in a great number of different places, apparently by a vast multitude of people. Then the gentleman who was not Bill got his knee below <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins’ diaphragm, and tried to curl him up upon it.</p>
			<p>When his sensations became less entangled he was sitting upon the turf, and eight or ten men⁠—the night was dark, and he was rather too confused to count⁠—standing round him, apparently waiting for him to recover. He mournfully assumed that he was captured, and would probably have made some philosophical reflections on the fickleness of fortune, had not his internal sensations disinclined him for speech.</p>
			<p>He noticed very quickly that his wrists were not handcuffed, and then a flask of brandy was put in his hands. This touched him a little⁠—it was such unexpected kindness.</p>
			<p>“He’s a-comin’ round,” said a voice which he fancied he recognised as belonging to the Hammerpond second footman.</p>
			<p>“We’ve got ’em, sir, both of ’em,” said the <span epub:type="z3998:place">Hammerpond</span> butler, the man who had handed him the flask. “Thanks to <em>you</em>.”</p>
			<p>No one answered this remark. Yet he failed to see how it applied to him.</p>
			<p>“He’s fair dazed,” said a strange voice; “the villains half-murdered him.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Teddy Watkins decided to remain fair dazed until he had a better grasp of the situation. He perceived that two of the black figures round him stood side-by-side with a dejected air, and there was something in the carriage of their shoulders that suggested to his experienced eye hands that were bound together. Two! In a flash he rose to his position. He emptied the little flask and staggered⁠—obsequious hands assisting him⁠—to his feet. There was a sympathetic murmur.</p>
			<p>“Shake hands, sir, shake hands,” said one of the figures near him. “Permit me to introduce myself. I am very greatly indebted to you. It was the jewels of my wife, Lady Aveling, which attracted these scoundrels to the house.”</p>
			<p>“Very glad to make your lordship’s acquaintance,” said Teddy Watkins.</p>
			<p>“I presume you saw the rascals making for the shrubbery, and dropped down on them?”</p>
			<p>“That’s exactly how it happened,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins.</p>
			<p>“You should have waited till they got in at the window,” said Lord Aveling; “they would get it hotter if they had actually committed the burglary. And it was lucky for you two of the policemen were out by the gates, and followed up the three of you. I doubt if you could have secured the two of them⁠—though it was confoundedly plucky of you, all the same.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I ought to have thought of all that,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins; “but one can’t think of everythink.”</p>
			<p>“Certainly not,” said Lord Aveling. “I am afraid they have mauled you a little,” he added. The party was now moving towards the house. “You walk rather lame. May I offer you my arm?”</p>
			<p>And instead of entering Hammerpond House by the dressing-room window, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins entered it⁠—slightly intoxicated, and inclined now to cheerfulness again⁠—on the arm of a real live peer, and by the front door. “This,” thought <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins, “is burgling in style!” The “scoundrels,” seen by the gaslight, proved to be mere local amateurs unknown to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins, and they were taken down into the pantry and there watched over by the three policemen, two gamekeepers with loaded guns, the butler, an ostler, and a carman, until the dawn allowed of their removal to <span epub:type="z3998:place">Hazelhurst</span> police-station. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins was made much of in the saloon. They devoted a sofa to him, and would not hear of a return to the village that night. Lady Aveling was sure he was brilliantly original, and said her idea of Turner was just such another rough, half-inebriated, deep-eyed, brave, and clever man. Someone brought up a remarkable little folding-ladder that had been picked up in the shrubbery, and showed him how it was put together. They also described how wires had been found in the shrubbery, evidently placed there to trip-up unwary pursuers. It was lucky he had escaped these snares. And they showed him the jewels.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Watkins had the sense not to talk too much, and in any conversational difficulty fell back on his internal pains. At last he was seized with stiffness in the back, and yawning. Everyone suddenly awoke to the fact that it was a shame to keep him talking after his affray, so he retired early to his room, the little red room next to Lord Aveling’s suite.</p>
			<p>The dawn found a deserted easel bearing a canvas with a green inscription, in the Hammerpond Park, and it found Hammerpond House in commotion. But if the dawn found <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Teddy Watkins and the Aveling diamonds, it did not communicate the information to the police.</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
